New `Development Guide` section in the doc (#533)
eclipse-qrisp/Qrisp: documentation/source/reference/Development Guide/code_quality.rst

expected to meet: static analysis, code style, and type annotations.

.. note::

    The checks described on this page are not yet enforced automatically by the
    CI pipeline or pre-commit hooks. They are recommended practices that
    contributors are encouraged to follow. Automated enforcement may be
    introduced in the future.

Preserving existing behaviour
------------------------------

Unless a breaking change has been explicitly agreed on with the maintainers,
every contribution must preserve all existing user-facing behaviour.

A practical rule of thumb: if a user's existing code would stop working after
your change, it is a breaking change. If you believe a breaking change is
necessary, clearly document it in the pull request description so maintainers
can make an informed decision.

Static analysis
---------------

Use **pylint** or **ruff** to catch common issues before submitting a pull
request.

- Pylint documentation: https://pylint.readthedocs.io/
- Ruff documentation: https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/

.. code-block:: bash

    # Analyse a single file
    ruff check src/qrisp/circuit/quantum_circuit.py

    # Analyse the full source tree

>     ruff check src/

Reviewer: nit we should not provide these commands. Link the documentation for the tool directly. 

I state this because `ruff` can be used as a linter or a formatter. The instructions right now only provide one way to use `ruff` (as a linter). You can also automate the linting checks in ruff without requiring to manually make the changes. 

You can also use it as a formatter but the command for that is different.

Issues worth prioritising include the ones related to code logic, efficiency, and maintainability:

- Mutable default arguments
- Unnecessary ``elif`` or ``return`` statements
- Repeated blocks of code
- Deeply nested functions
- Unused imports or arguments
- Missing docstrings for public functions and classes
- etc.

Some warnings are cosmetic (e.g., ``line-too-long``) and can be deferred.

> Others point to real quality issues and should be addressed.

Reviewer: this can go into code-syntax guidelines. Niko's student will hopefully help us create these.

Edit: sorry, wrong @

Author: This PR has precisely the purpose of start documenting code-syntax and quality guidelines. If you are working on their specific implementation separately (I assume with `ruff`), feel free to update this PR accordingly

Reviewer: I am not sure if those guidelines will be done soon. Niko has some thesis-students working on it.

Author: Ok, then I guess we can leave it here as it is and then update the guide once they will be ready : )
This guide will need to be constantly updated in any case

Reviewer: Yup, for this reason, I suggest we add something along the lines of `run linter, formatter and type checker for the changes you have made in your PR`. Via ruff the following tools and their checks can be run: pycodestyle, pydocstyle, isort, pylint , flake8 and pyflakes

IDK if there's something else worth mentioning and checking in a new PR. 

After we automate these checks in the CI, I think it will be then safe to mention the ways to automate these checks via pre-commit in the contributing guide.

Author: I am fine with that :+1:  Feel free to push a commit yourself with these changes and the open-source links below whenever you have time (I would like this PR to be commonly shared across Qrisp devs)

You can also configure **pre-commit** to run linting automatically before every

> commit, catching issues as early as possible:

Reviewer: we should not advise this right now. enabling pre-commit will raise many unrelated errors.

.. _DevGuideCodeQuality:

Code Quality
============

This page covers the engineering standards that contributions to Qrisp are
expected to meet: static analysis, code style, and type annotations.

.. note::

    The checks described on this page are not yet enforced automatically by the
    CI pipeline or pre-commit hooks. They are recommended practices that

>     contributors are encouraged to follow. Automated enforcement may be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    contributors are encouraged to follow for the changes they introduce. Automated enforcement will be
```
minor nit: `will` sounds better than `may`

    introduced in the future.

Preserving existing behaviour
------------------------------

Unless a breaking change has been explicitly agreed on with the maintainers,
every contribution must preserve all existing user-facing behaviour.

A practical rule of thumb: if a user's existing code would stop working after
your change, it is a breaking change. If you believe a breaking change is
necessary, clearly document it in the pull request description so maintainers
can make an informed decision.

Static analysis
---------------

Use **pylint** or **ruff** to catch common issues before submitting a pull
request.

- Pylint documentation: https://pylint.readthedocs.io/
- Ruff documentation: https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/

Issues worth prioritising include the ones related to code logic, efficiency, and maintainability:

- Mutable default arguments
- Unnecessary ``elif`` or ``return`` statements
- Repeated blocks of code
- Deeply nested functions
- Unused imports or arguments
- Missing docstrings for public functions and classes

> - etc.

Reviewer: a large number of these have automated fixes via linting/formatting tools. I am not sure what the motivation is for mentioning these explicitly here? @PietropaoloFrisoni @Nik-SteinFraunh 

The only one that I think is worth mentioning is missing docstring. Here, we should state the docstrings should have a description of what the function does, an examples section, a section to document the input args etc. This is already mentioned in the docs guide. Perhaps link that section here?

Author: Ideally, once we have `pylint` or `ruff` integrated in the CI checks (with the rules we select, for example ignoring `line-too-long` and similar), this part will be completely obsolete and we can remove it. Until then, I think it would be good to mention that the user is responsible to check the code quality and maintainability with some concrete references and examples.  I don't know about `ruff`, but `pylint` automatically flags a missing docstring in a function or class unless special cases (such as the concrete definition of an abstract method in a sublclass, etc.). I agree that it would be good to link the section that refers to the NumPy-style docstring used within qrisp (we might just link the new `documentation` page in the same folder)

Some warnings are cosmetic (e.g., ``line-too-long``) and can be deferred.
Others point to real quality issues and should be addressed.

Relevant style guides:

- PEP 8 — Python Style Guide: https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/
- PEP 257 — Docstring Conventions: https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/

Code logic and readability
---------------------------

Small improvements to readability and structure are highly encouraged, even
when they are not strictly bug fixes. A well-placed rename or a function split
into two smaller ones often makes the biggest difference for future
contributors.

When working on core components, avoid changes that significantly degrade
performance: unnecessary allocations, non-vectorised operations where
vectorisation is natural, or tightly looped code that could be simplified.

If a change might affect performance, mention it in the pull request
description.

> AI-assisted development tools (such as GitHub Copilot) can help identify

Reviewer: Question: should we think about adding a proper AI policy? I found this resource with a collection of AI policies across many open source projects: https://github.com/melissawm/open-source-ai-contribution-policies

Reviewer 2: @renezander90 you and your experience with Copilot could be helpful

Author: I think this decision belongs to Fraunhofer and/or the Eclipse organization. Tagging @bastibock for visibility

simplifications, but manual review is essential: these tools sometimes change

> code logic subtly. Always verify generated output carefully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code logic subtly. Always verify generated output carefully and that all associated unit tests pass.
```
